---
name: 'An integrated analysis of the transcriptome and miRnome of the developing zebrafish (Danio rerio) exposed to bisphenol A'
speakers:
	- Ada Madrid
categories:
	- Talk (8min)
---
Ada Madrid & Gary Hardiman SBS, QUB. amadridsandoval01@qub.ac.uk Bisphenol A (BPA) is an inexpensive and convenient plasticizer commonly used to make polycarbonate plastics and epoxy resins that can be found in daily products such as water and infant plastic bottles, lacquers used to coat food cans and bottle tops.  BPA acts as an endocrine disruptor (ED) because its chemical structure resembles the female sex hormone Estradiol (E2). BPA has been associated with many diseases related to the endocrine disruption. In the two decades, the zebrafish (Danio rerio) model has come forward as a valuable tool to study system toxicology and human diseases. Using zebrafish as a systems toxicology model, we hypothesized that BPA-exposure impacts the miRNome in larval zebrafish and establishes an epigenome more susceptible to disease development. The present study investigated the impact of environmental levels of BPA (5nM and 25nM) on developing zebrafish embryos at 96-hours post fertilization (96hpf), which marks the end of the embryonic stage and where the animals feed for the first time.  At this stage gut, liver, pancreas, nervous system, musculature, and the cardiovascular system reflect adult physiology in many respects. Two biological replicates (n = 200 embryos per replicate) were included to facilitate statistical analysis. We examined alterations in expression of messenger RNA (mRNA) and microRNA (miRNA) using gene ontology and pathway analysis. BPA treatments were evaluated using control treatments for comparison: negative (water + ethanol) and positive control EE2 (17αEthinylestradiol). We determined that BPA exposure (1) significantly altered 14 miRNAs in the developing zebrafish (q ≤0.40); (2) apoptotic processes, neuron development and transport activity to the cells were the enriched GO terms. We concluded that BPA modifies the expression of various miRNAs in the early development phase of zebrafish, and this may raise health risks in long-term chronic exposure.
