---
name: 'Good Models or Good Riddance? An investigation into the suitability of cell lines as models of ovarian cancer histotypes'
speakers:
	- Aideen McCabe
categories:
	- Talk (8min)
---
Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the most fatal gynaecological malignancy, accounting for over 200,000 deaths worldwide per year. EOC is a highly heterogeneous disease, classified into five major histological subtypes- high-grade serous (HGSOC), clear cell (CCOC), endometrioid (ENOC), mucinous (MOC) and low-grade serous (LGSOC) ovarian carcinomas. Classification of EOCs is clinically beneficial, as the various subtypes respond differently to chemotherapy and have distinct prognoses.   Cell lines are often used as in vitro models for EOC, however, most studies that make use of EOC cell lines fail to take the subtype of the model system into account. Furthermore, the similarity of cell lines to their cognate primary tumours is often ignored.  This study classifies 56 EOC cell lines into their putative histological subtype. Non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) optimally clustered cell lines into five groups, corresponding to each of the five EOC subtypes. We also analysed the mutational and copy number landscapes of these lines, to investigate whether cell lines harboured the characteristic genomic alterations of each EOC subtype. Furthermore, we compared the gene expression profiles of cell lines with 93 primary tumour samples stratified by subtype, to identify lines with the highest molecular similarity to HGSOC, CCOC, ENOC and MOC primary tumours.  Overall, we examined the molecular features of EOC cell lines and primary tumours of multiple subtypes. We identify cell lines most and least suited to represent four different subtypes of EOC for transcriptomic studies. We also highlight the need for additional, subtype specific research to be carried out, especially for rarer EOCs such as LGSOC.  Ultimately, we emphasize the importance of choosing suitable cell line models of EOC for both in silico and in vitro studies, to maximise the clinical relevance of experiments and improve patient outcomes.
