---
name: 'Using novel genes to assess soil health through metagenomic and bioinformatics  '
speakers:
	- Aileen Lynch
categories:
	-
---
Phosphorus is essential for all organisms and the limiting factor of primary terrestrial production. Over 30% of soluble phosphorus is used on agricultural lands. The consumption of soluble phosphorus exceeds reserves in many countries, resulting in a global phosphorus shortage affecting global food distribution. Current fertilisers result in a run-off of nutrients to surface water. The higher concentrations of nutrients in the freshwater systems result in an acceleration of eutrophication, resulting in hypoxic or anoxic conditions. Excessive phosphorus fertilisation results in soil compaction and reduction in crop production, which suggests that alternatives to current phosphorus fertilisation practices need to be examined. Methanotrophs are soil microorganisms containing a membrane-bound particulate methane monooxygenase that convert CH4 to CH3OH to utilise carbon for biomass. Methanotrophs are ubiquitous in oxic environments and oxic-anoxic interface of soils up to 30cm depth. Methanotrophs contain the enzyme methanol dehydrogenase,  a Ca2+ dependent (MxaF) and Ln3+ dependent (xoxF), which converts methanol into formaldehyde.  The Allen group has shown that free-living microorganisms can be isolated from soil that utilises CeO4P as a sole source of phosphorous when grown on methanol as a carbon and energy source. These microorganisms express a XoxF-type methanol dehydrogenase that utilises Ce3+ as a prosthetic group. Therefore, CeO4P can potentially be used as an insoluble form of phosphorus to reduce eutrophication, and the xoxF genes could be used as potential soil health indicators.  Methods: Complete full genome metagenomic and bioinformatic analysis of 500 samples from agricultural lands in Northern Ireland. Evaluate relationships in silico between mxaF and xoxF genes, current farming practices, physiochemical data, and agricultural production. Followed by in vitro laboratory experimentation and agricultural field experiments based on metagenomic findings. 
