---
name: 'Epigenetic Aging and its Association with Childhood Adversity and Psychiatric Risk'
speakers:
	- Anna Grossbach
categories:
	-
---
Adverse childhood experiences increase the risk for developing psychiatric disorders in adulthood. Epigenetic modifications, such as changes in DNA methylation (DNAm) patterns, are one possible link between these events on a biochemical level. Over the past decade, condensing DNAm information into estimates of biological aging has gained increasing popularity within the scientific community. These age estimates are known as epigenetic age (EA) and are strongly correlated with chronological age. However, departures from these predictions, known as epigenetic age acceleration (EAA), are associated with various exposures, health outcomes and all-cause mortality. In this study, we analyzed longitudinal data from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC), which included repeated adversity reports for children from 18 weeks in gestation up to 7 years of age, DNAm measures at ages 7 and 17, and continuous psychiatric risk evaluations for early adulthood. We aimed to determine how longitudinal EA mediates the connection between childhood adversities and increased risk for developing psychiatric disorders, such as depression. Using linear mixed effect models, we evaluated the effect of seven childhood adversity dimensions on longitudinal EA. Furthermore, we applied a 2-stage modelling approach to explore the effect of longitudinal EA on psychiatric risk, using continuous scores from the “Short Mood and Feelings Questionnaire” (SMFQ). Our results indicated associations between family instability and parental cruelty with EAA. For example, children exposed to family instability at age 7 had one year of EAA on average (95% CI: 0.4 - 1.7, p-value < 0.001). EAA was not associated with increased SMFQ scores. Although preliminary, these results suggest that childhood adversities may contribute to quicker epigenetic aging, which could have long-term consequences on human health and behavior.
