---
name: 'Meta-analysis of publicly available datasets for the identification of biomarkers for high-grade serous ovarian cancer '
speakers:
	- Asia Jordan
categories:
	-
---
Background: There are approximately 400 cases of ovarian cancer recorded annually in Ireland. This disease has a 35-45% 5-year survival rate, with the incidence and mortality rates in Ireland above the European average. There is neither a screening test for ovarian cancer, nor a test that can detect the disease effectively at an early stage. This results in most cases (75%) being diagnosed at a late stage. When detected early the 5-year survival rates increase to the 90% percentile. High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is the most common and most aggressive form of the disease. The aim of this project is to develop an epigenetic blood and/or urine test which can detect HGSOC at an early stage.   Methods: We identified 22 datsets, with methylomic data on HGSOC patients. Data were curated, QC’d, normalised, and filtered to remove probes which hybridised, performed poorly and covered SNP or non-CpG sites using the rnbeads package. Differentially methylated probes (DMPs) were identified, which were then annotated to identify the most significant differentially methylated regions (DMRs) in ovarian cancer vs controls.  Results: Preliminary analysis indicates a trend towards widespread hypomethylation in HGSOC, with the exception of the promoter CpG islands, which appear more hypermethylated.   Conclusion: The methylation of DMPs/DMRs need to be analysed in urine & blood samples and other non-ovarian cancer cohorts. This is to ensure specificity of the DMPs/DMRs in liquid biopsy and ovarian cancer respectively.  
