---
name: 'Time to Flower: A flowering locust ortholog is associated with photoperiod-insensitive flowering in hemp (Cannabis sativa)'
speakers:
	- Caroline Dowling
categories:
	- Talk (8min)
---
Hemp (Cannabis sativa L.) is an extraordinarily versatile crop, with applications ranging from medicinal compounds to seed oil and fibre products. Cannabis sativa is a short-day plant, and its flowering is tightly controlled by photoperiod. However, substantial genetic variation exists for photoperiod sensitivity in C. sativa, and photoperiod-insensitive (“autoflower”) cultivars are available.  Using a bi-parental mapping population and bulked segregant analysis, we identified Autoflower2, a 0.5 Mbp QTL significantly associated with photoperiod-insensitive flowering in hemp. Autoflower2 contains an ortholog of the central flowering time regulator FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) from Arabidopsis which we termed CsFT1. Extensive sequence divergence between alleles of CsFT1 was identified between photoperiod-sensitive and insensitive cultivars, including a duplication of CsFT1. Genotyping of several mapping populations and a diversity panel confirmed a strong correlation between CsFT1 alleles and photoperiod response as well as affirming that at least two independent loci for this agriculturally important trait, Autoflower1 and 2, exist in the C. sativa gene pool.  This study reveals the multiple independent origins of photoperiod insensitivity in C. sativa, supporting the likelihood of a complex domestication history in this species. By integrating the genetic relaxation of photoperiod sensitivity into novel C. sativa cultivars, expansion to higher latitudes, such as Ireland, will be permitted, thus allowing the full potential of this versatile crop to be reached. 
