---
name: 'Dissecting the role of PRC2 in gene regulation in acute myeloid leukaemia'
speakers:
	- Cosmin Tudose
categories:
	-
---
Acute leukaemia is characterised by the disruption of haematopoietic differentiation due to genetic alterations in factors that control developmental processes. Epigenetic regulators like Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) are frequently mutated or deleted in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), leading to a decrease in repressive H3K27me3 across the genome. While haploinsufficiency of PRC2 core components EZH2, SUZ12 and EED correlates with poor outcome in childhood leukaemia, the precise molecular mechanism underpinning aggressive disease biology is poorly understood. Additional to its methyltransferase function, PRC2 directly alters chromatin conformation, promoting DNA looping and enhancer-promoter contacts at topologically associating domains (TADs) during development, but a similar role in leukaemia has not been explored.  To understand the consequences of PRC2 loss-of-function in AML and the mechanism of altered gene expression, we developed an isogenic model of PRC2 loss via CRISPR-Cas9 editing of EZH2 in the OCI-AML2 cell-line. We then performed chromosome conformation capture (Hi-C) and RNA-seq on EZH2+/+ OCI-AML2 and two EZH2+/- OCI-AML2 clones.  We detected ~300-500 differential loops between WT and EZH2-deficient cells, suggesting that PRC2 deficiency leads to altered 3D genome architecture. Additionally, we see a loss of higher order chromatin structure when EZH2 is depleted, suggested by a decrease in the number of TADs: 1846 and 682 in EZH2+/- clones vs 2460 in WT cells. By piling up PRC2-targeted and H3K27me3 regions inferred from public ChIP-Seq data, we uncovered a loss of “loopability” around high-confidence PRC2 targets and at H3K27me3 sites in EZH2-deficient cells. Integration of Hi-C and RNA-Seq revealed several disrupted enhancer-promoter contacts that correlated with altered transcription upon EZH2-depletion. We are currently integrating information on chromatin opening upon PRC2-depletion from recently-performed ATAC-Seq profiling.
