---
name: 'Investigating the mechanisms of rediploidization in the Paddlefish and Sturgeon by characterisation of syntenic breakpoints in their genomes.'
speakers:
	- Dearbhaile Casey
categories:
	-
---
It was long thought that a whole genome duplication(WGD) had occurred independently in both Paddlefish and Sturgeon. Recent work has shown that the event was in fact, shared and was masked by the fact that species divergence happened before the rediploidisation process had even gotten half-way through. Here, we identify regions of the genome that rediploidised before speciation and those regions that returned to a diploid state after speciation to gain a better understating of how rediploidisation proceeds. It is thought that the rediploidisation process is initialised by genome rearrangements that halt recombination between duplicate homologous chromosomes and thus restore diploid inheritance. Previous evidence has shown that both Sturgeon and Paddlefish genomes appear to contain broad blocks of ohnologs that share similar rediploidisation histories. By identifying microsyntenic blocks of ohnologs we can evaluate two scenarios: i) blocks that have a consistent gene-tree topology showing a shared WGD, which we can assume rediploidised before the speciation event and have 1:1 orthology, and ii) blocks with a consistent gene tree topology defining a post-speciation WGD scenario, which would have rediploidised after speciation and would have a 2:2 orthology assignment. Testing whether blocks of ohnologs with conserved microsynteny show a consistent topology, either the pre-speciation or post-speciation scenario, will allow us to assess whether rearrangements halting recombination between duplicate homologous chromosomes is the primary mechanism of rediploidisation. If true, quantifying these blocks into our two scenarios will allow for a better estimate of how much of the genome had returned to diploid before these species diverged.
