---
name: 'Characterisation of the effects of KMT2C and KMT2D mutations in breast cancer'
speakers:
	- Emily Tinsley
categories:
	-
---
Reprogramming of the epigenetic landscape of cells has been shown to contribute towards tumorigenesis in multiple solid tumours including breast cancers. Examples of epigenetic alterations include changes to methylation and acetylation patterns which regulate gene expression. KMT2C and KMT2D are histone-lysine-N-methyltransferases responsible for mono-methylation of the 4th lysine of histone 3 (H3K4) at gene enhancer sites, a signal associated with active gene expression. KMT2C and KMT2D mutations are two of the most frequently mutated genes in cancer occurring at frequencies of 9% and 4% respectively in TCGA breast cancer samples. Currently, the mechanism of action of these histone methyltransferases is not well understood. The aim of this project is to further understand how mutations in KMT2C/D contribute towards breast cancer by characterising mutation patterns across the genes and identifying specific downstream genes and pathways most affected by KMT2C/D deficiency. We have focused on samples within TCGA, carrying out an in depth analysis of mutation, copy-number and RNA-seq data. Logistic regression of KMT2C/D status on RNA-seq data was carried out using a supervised elastic net penalized model across multiple cancers including breast to identify the genes with expression most affected by KMT2C/D deficiency. The pan-cancer model had an AUROC of 60.9% and 70.8% in testing sets for KMT2C and KMT2D respectively. Genes most affected by KMT2C deficiency are enriched for those involved in oestrogen response highlighting a possible mechanism for KMT2C action. We hope that this analysis will contribute towards the understanding of how KMT2C/D mutations drive tumorigenesis and open up areas for further exploration.
