---
name: 'Where Phages 'Phit' into the Pangenome of Streptococcus suis: Informing Decisions on Phage Therapy'
speakers:
	- Emmet Campbell
categories:
	-
---
Strepotococus suis is a zoonotic pig pathobiont which severely impacts the global swine industry, and can be isolated from the pig nasopharynx and gut microbiome. Intervention methods are either unreliable or contribute to antimicrobial resistance. As antibiotic efficacy decreases with continued misuse, novel therapeutics for tackling bacterial pathogens are long overdue. Understanding the diversity of S. suis will allow for forming better decisions on developing bacteriophage therapies to tackle this pathogen.  From the BV-BRC database 2,121 S. suis genomes were downloaded with the quality filters “Complete, WGS, good”. Sourmash was used to compare genetic diversity and identify cliques, and several annotation steps to identify: coding sequences (CDSs), mobile genetic elements (prophages), COG functional categories, and antiviral defense systems. A pangenome analysis was performed of the entire sample set and two largest cliques.  S. suis possesses a diverse population structure, with clear clique formation across the sample set. The pangenome of the entire population had a core of only 161 gene families, while the first and second largest cliques had 1,427 and 1,360 respectively. The most commonly identified taxa of prophage was from the Caudoviricetes class. Finally, while the entire population had few genes highly conserved across the species, function did appear to be conserved. Specific COG categories were absent from the core of the species, but present in the core of each clique. Similarly, no single restriction modification type I/II/II was core in the species, however the function itself was present in almost every isolate.  These preliminary results provide a strong base for investigating the potential of bacteriophage therapies as effective controls for S. suis within pigs and provide evidence that antiviral potential will be difficult to circumvent in the species as a whole. 
