---
name: 'RiboSeq.Org Data Portal: unified access to processed and standardised ribosome profiling data and metainformation.'
speakers:
	- Jack Tierney
categories:
	-
---
RiboSeq.Org is an online ecosystem of computational resources and datasets for the study of translation. It features tools for processing, analysing, and visualising high-throughput data from ribosome profiling (Ribo-seq) and related assays. It currently comprises RiboGalaxy, GWIPS-viz, Trips-Viz, and RiboCrypt, the latter three providing a wide range of functionalities for visualising and interrogating processed Ribo-seq data mapped to genomes or transcriptomes. While a great resource for exploring public data, a shortcoming of the current ecosystem is that each tool uses independently processed data with convergence on only a fraction of all publicly available data.  This fraction is diminishing over time due to the rapid development of NGS-based RNA technologies as evidenced by the exponential growth in the amount of publicly available data. This calls for better standardization of metadata structuring and easier access to pre-processed data for both machine and human users. To address this challenge, we have established RiboSeq.Org Data Portal, a new comprehensive database for uniformly processed publicly available Ribo-seq datasets and their matched RNA-seq data, along with corresponding meta-information. In addition to the metainformation extracted from public repositories, the database provides rich information on data quality, including the distribution of ribosomal occupancy over functional regions, triplet periodicity, sequence biases, artefacts, etc. The searchable interface allows users to select datasets for their data mining experiments and visualize them using any of the RiboSeq.Org tools or download the processed data for offline analysis using any other compatible tool. We envision that the RiboSeq.Org Data Portal framework is scalable to most high-throughput sequencing technologies and can be applied to other RNA analysis methods in the future, facilitating data re-usability and results reproducibility. 
