---
name: 'Multiple myeloma: single cell-level characterization of natural killer cells show disease specific pathways driving immune exhaustion'
speakers:
	- Jacopo Umberto Verga
categories:
	- Talk (8min)
---
Multiple myeloma (MM) is a blood cancer caused by the accumulation of plasma cells in the bone marrow. Disease progression is associated with immune suppression. To understand whether and how the innate immune Natural Killer (NK) cells may be impacted by MM, we analyzed NK cell transcriptomic changes at single cell level. We integrated 6 scRNA-Seq studies covering all stages of MM disease progression. Cell types were identified with singleR. To classify NK cells as resident (rNK) or exhausted (eNK), we developed an algorithm that scores the cell state based on a gene expression signature. The classification was validated with GSEA and gene sets from MSigDB. Differential gene expression (DGE) with Seurat (method =”LR”, FDR<0.05),gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis with ClusterProfiler and GOSemSim. Transcription factor (TF) activity was determined with Scenic. The dataset contains 14,103 and 7,596 NK cells in MM and healthy samples, respectively. The proportion of eNK cells increased in all the disease stages (p.value<0.01). eNK cells in MM up-regulated several immune checkpoint (IC) receptors, genes associated with the development of malignancies and altered tumor immune microenvironment. A minority of DEG, enriched Biological Processes (BP) and TF were shared by eNK cells in MM and healthy samples, suggesting disease-specific pathways driving NK cell exhaustion in MM. We found TF1 present only in MM reported to enforce exhaustion in T cells. 52 and 14 TF-regulons contained downstream IC genes in MM and healthy samples, respectively. In MM, the regulon containing the most downstream IC genes was belonging to TF2,knockout of which gene was shown to improve T cell function. TF2 is a known regulator of several genes involved in NK inhibition. Overall, the identified DEG, GOs and TFs indicates the existence of myeloma-specific exhaustion pathways. Results provide innovative insights on NK exhaustion in MM.
