---
name: 'Development of a framework to benchmark transcriptomic signatures of cancer cell radiosensitivity '
speakers:
	- John O'Connor
categories:
	-
---
Physical refinement of radiation treatment has improved patient outcomes, but biological personalisation remains elusive. Gene expression signatures, proposed to estimate radiosensitivity, have shown poor in vitro validation results but some radiosensitivity signatures have shown associations with clinical outcomes. We tested published models in clinical data, benchmarking against signatures developed from resampled genes. Clinical and microarray data from the TCGA glioblastoma dataset (n=241), the Erasmus (n=344) & Karolinska (n=159) breast cancer cohorts, and a lung cancer cohort (n=429) was obtained. The 10-gene radiosensitivity index (RSI) and a 31-gene meta-signature (Kim et al., BMC Genomics 2012; 13:348) were benchmarked against resampled signatures trained on the NCI60, using the same model structure and number of genes. Cox regression was performed pooled over outcome (first recurrence [FR] or overall survival [OS]) and treatment (with radiation [RT+] or without [RT-]). Functional annotation was employed for published signatures and single gene models to identify underlying biological processes. The RSI’s signature’s hazard ratio (HR) was statistically equivalent to the resampled signatures, while the Kim signature’s HR was statistically significant in FR_RT- (HR: 1.53, 95% CI: 1.06–2.20) and OS_RT+ (HR: 1.24, 95% CI: 1.07–1.44). However, both signatures were within the 95% CI range for the resampled signatures. Accordingly, while some signatures have a significant HR in clinical datasets, they did not improve upon resampled signatures. Proliferation and immune processes were identified in published signatures and the univariate gene analysis regardless of RT status. This suggests that signatures without radiation-specific biological rationale may appear predictive in clinical datasets. Further work is required to evidence predictive ability and elucidate biological mechanisms underpinning performance.
