---
name: 'Selection of miRNA candidates for the treatment of sarcopenia using network-based analysis and differential expression scoring.'
speakers:
	- Karen Guerrero Vazquez
categories:
	-
---
Sarcopenia is a natural consequence of aging and leads to progressive muscle wasting. Currently, there is no cure for this condition, and target identification and validation remain pressing challenges. Many potential therapeutic targets have failed in clinical trials or shown poor association with the disease. This project aims to address these challenges by creating a model of microRNA:target interactions for more efficient in silico selection of potential therapeutic targets for sarcopenia. We conducted a novel network-based analysis of microRNA involvement in aging using RNAseq and microarray data from five studies, with a total of 246 samples of skeletal muscle from healthy participants with ages ranging from 19 to 85 years old. We analyzed young, middle age and older adults and determined interactions between genes coming from co-expression, colocalization, genetic interaction, physical interaction, predicted and shared protein domain calculated with GeneMania. Next, we predicted microRNAs that are putative regulators of shortlisted genes using target prediction tools, such as TargetScan, mirDB and mirTarbase. Finally, we add tissue expression from Diana-miTed and miRNATissue Atlas2.  After identifying the network of gene:gene and microRNA:gene interactions, the relevance of each node was calculated using multiple scoring metrics and measures of centrality in order to identify the most likely key regulatory microRNAs and their targets during aging. Our model of microRNA-target interactions is specifically tailored to the context of muscle aging and offers a more comprehensive and accurate representation of the complex regulatory mechanisms involved in muscle aging than existing tools, as it integrates multiple layers of biological information. By identifying a few tens of microRNAs and genes with potential therapeutic power, our model offers a valuable and efficient approach to target identification and validation for the treatment of sarcopenia. 
