---
name: 'Transcriptomic characterisation and identification of potential neoantigens in cancer-associated fibroblasts in breast cancer.'
speakers:
	- Kevin Ryan
categories:
	-
---
Background: Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are a heterogeneous cell type forming part of the tumour microenvironment. CAFs have been shown to support angiogenesis and tumour growth, and to induce therapeutic resistance through the production of extracellular matrix. Here, we investigate the therapeutic potential of targeting CAFs, either transcriptionally or via CAF-specific neoantigens. Methods: CAFs and matched tumour-associated normal fibroblasts were cultured from tissue taken from 12 patients with breast cancer. Bulk RNA-sequencing was carried out on all samples, and whole-exome sequencing (WES) was carried out on samples from 6 patients. CIBERSORTx was used to characterise sample cell type proportions, with publicly available data from three distinct CAF subpopulations used as a reference. NeoFuse was used to identify predicted fusion neoantigens from the RNA-seq data, and the WES data was analysed using the nf-core/sarek pipeline. Results: The immunosuppressive-myofibroblastic subpopulation was found to be the most prevalent in our samples, however most samples also contained the normal-like CAF subpopulation. This analysis confirms the heterogeneity of the cultured fibroblasts, with important implications for therapeutic strategies targeting CAFs. Four of the 12 patients were predicted to have at least one fusion neoantigen specific to their CAF sample and a total of 213 putative missense single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were called across all samples. Seven SNPs remained following manual filtering using a combination of: visual inspection with Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV), outputs of multiple variant callers, and expression of the variant in the matched RNA-seq data. Future work will focus on neoantigens arising from these SNPs as well as the identification of additional candidate neoantigens from indels, splice variants, and other sources.
