---
name: 'Is there an advantage to polyploidy in animals? Monitoring stress responses in a synthetic C. elegans tetraploid '
speakers:
	- Laetitia Chauve
categories:
	-
---
Gene duplications play a major evolutionary role by providing raw material for functional innovation. Whole Genome Duplication (WGD), or polyploidization, is a particular case of duplication, where the entire genetic sequence is repeated within the nucleus. In plants, WGD is recognized as a major evolutionary force, and is linked to speciation and the ability to resist periods of stress and of environmental upheaval. In animals, examples of current polyploid species are rarer, but we know of several ancient events of WGD: for instance, two rounds of WGD occurred during early vertebrate evolution. Those events are usually followed by gene loss and diploidization, processes which reshape the genome and channel evolutionary outcomes. Stressful conditions (heat or cold) can generate WGD and one debated hypothesis states that polyploidy is adaptive on the short-term, however this has never been studied in animals.  Our goal is to understand the physiological consequences of polyploidy and its potential adaptive consequences. We are investigating the consequences of polyploidy in Caenorhabditis elegans, where tetraploidy can be artificially constructed. Our results reveal that although tetraploidy reduces fitness in regular conditions, tetraploid animals exhibit altered resistance under temperature-related stresses. Following exposure to heat stress, tetraploids exhibit slightly improved thermotolerance, prolonged hsp (heat shock protein) mRNA induction. These phenotypes can be linked with altered hsp-16.2 nuclear localization upon heat shock, using an in-vivo tractable system. Furthermore, tetraploids exhibit dramatic increase in recovery from severe cold stress at the adult stage. These results might help explain recent reports showing correlation between animal polyploidy and regions experiencing recent glaciation and large temperature variation.  
