---
name: 'Sensommatic: An efficient, scalable pipeline to mine and predict sensory receptor genes in the era of T2T and reference-quality genomes.'
speakers:
	- Louise Ryan
categories:
	-
---
Sensory perception enables an organism to perceive and interact with their environment. With roles in detecting prey, sensing predators and finding mates, it is clear that sensory systems are crucial to the survival of a species. At the molecular level,  chemosensory perception and vision are mediated by G-protein coupled receptors, which undergo a conformational change in response to sensory stimuli. Such chemoreceptor gene families have undergone extensive expansion and loss throughout mammalian evolution, with receptor counts varying drastically between species.  As these receptor counts are generally species-specific, conventional reference-based annotation tools will often underestimate the true number of sensory receptors in a given species. While there has been an exponential increase in the taxonomic diversity of publicly available genome assemblies in recent years, only ~30% of vertebrate species on the NCBI database are currently annotated. To overcome these limitations, we developed ‘Sensommatic’, an automated and accessible sensory receptor annotation pipeline. Sensommatic implements BLAST and AUGUSTUS to mine and predict sensory receptor genes from whole genome assemblies, adopting a one-to-many mapping approach.   We benchmarked pipeline performance by comparing Sensommatic predictions to mapped NCBI predictions for fourteen test species. We show that on average, Sensommatic recovers 95% of NCBI predictions, assigning correct functional or pseudogene status to 94% of these. Pipeline specificity was found to be 100% in all tests, incorporating zero off-target genes in the final dataset. We find that pipeline run-times do not scale with the assembly quality, while showing only a slight positive correlation with the number of predicted receptors. We apply Sensommatic to publicly available mammalian genomes to investigate sensory adaption, shedding light on the environmental factors that drive sensory evolution.
