---
name: 'demuxSNP: supervised demultiplexing of scRNAseq data using cell hashing and SNPs'
speakers:
	- Michael Lynch
categories:
	- Talk (8min)
---
Sequencing at a single-cell resolution allows unprecedented understanding of biologically relevant differences between individual cells. Multiplexing, that is loading multiple biological samples into each sequencing lane, is widely used to reduce sequencing costs. The sequencing reads must then be demultiplexed or assigned to their respective biological sample. We present our approach and its corresponding Bioconductor package ‘demuxSNP’ which overcomes current challenges in demultiplexing scRNAseq reads from genetically distinct biological samples. Demultiplexing is usually done either through cell tagging or exploiting genetic differences between biological sample. Tagging methods work by experimentally tagging cells in a biological sample with a different tag prior to sequencing. Issues with nonspecific binding of tags and poor tagging quality create challenges in demultiplexing. Alternatively, genetic variation between biological samples (SNPs) can be used to perform computational demultiplexing with genotype information (Demuxlet) or genotype free (Vireo, Souporcell). Methods which require genotyping have low uptake due to this increased cost and genotype free methods struggle to identify rarer biological samples.  We propose a method utilising data from both tags and SNPs to increase performance. Using cell tagging methods we can confidently demultiplex some but not all cells due to issues with tagging quality. We train a classifier using SNP profiles of singlet cells assigned with high confidence from the genetically distinct biological samples. Additionally, demuxSNP combines high confidence singlet SNP profiles from different groups to simulate doublets (two cells encapsulated in the same droplet) and includes these in the training data. We can then assign low confidence cells (doublets or singlets which we could not confidently call using cell tagging methods). demuxSNP uses a subset of SNPs in a computationally efficient and cell-type unbiased algorithm. 
