---
name: 'Identifying malignant cells in acute myeloid leukaemia using genomic alterations inferred from single-cell RNA sequencing data '
speakers:
	- Micheál Ó Dálaigh
categories:
	-
---
Background: Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) is an aggressive malignancy, resulting in the accumulation of poorly differentiated blasts in the bone marrow (BM). Relapse is common and has been attributed to the incomplete eradication of leukaemic stem cells (LSCs). LSCs are similar to normal haematopoietic stem cells, thus identifying LSCs is a challenging task. Single cell transcriptomics (scRNA-seq) have allowed for the characterisation of genomic alterations in AML and exploiting this knowledge may aid in identifying malignant cells. We hypothesised that AML cells may differ from normal haematopoietic cells in the complement of expressed single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and copy number variations (CNVs) which could be used to demarcate the malignant cells. Methods: We performed scRNA-seq on 28 longitudinal samples (diagnosis, n=10; remission, n=7; relapse, n=11) from BM aspirates of 10 patients. Variants were called with BCFtools and previously characterised AML mutations were identified using Papaemmanuil et al. (2016) as a reference. CNV profiles were generated with the R package CopyKAT which uses expression levels of adjacent genes to infer genomic copy number and predicts the cells’ ploidy state (diploid/aneuploid). Results: We identified AML-relevant SNVs in 9 samples from 5 patients but less than 1% of cells contained variants of interest and the genomic sites of these SNVs were covered by reads in less than 10% of cells. CNV profiles provided richer data and identified approximately 50% of the cells to be aneuploid, with the expected trend of a higher proportion of aneuploid cells present at diagnosis and relapse compared to remission. Conclusion: The sparse coverage of the single-cell transcriptome data precludes the use of individual SNVs for categorising cells as normal or malignant. CNV profiles on the other hand, may have the power to identify malignant cells even in cells with no reads mapping to locations of known AML driver mutations.
