---
name: 'Regulation of Gene Expression in Stimulated T-cells by PD-1 and BTLA Signals'
speakers:
	- Muhammad Zainul Arifin
categories:
	-
---
Antibodies targeting the immune checkpoint PD1, have revolutionized cancer therapy. Nevertheless, only a subset of patients benefit from PD1 blockade and blocking additional immune checkpoints has the potential to increase the efficacy of immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy. BTLA is a coinhibitory receptor broadly expressed in T cells and we and others have shown that blockade of BTLA alone or in combination with PD1 can enhance human T cell responses in vitro. There are several transcriptomic studies on the effects of PD-1 blockade in vivo but they do not provide insight into the effects of PD-1 on TCR-induced gene expression and there are virtually no reports that have addressed how coinhibitory molecules other than PD-1 affect the transcriptional program initiated by engagement of the TCR/CD3 complex. Here, we have generated reporter cells coexpressing PD-1 and BTLA and used our coculture system to analyze and compare the effect of PD-1 and BTLA-signaling on the transcriptional program induced by the engagement of the TCR/CD3 complex. We observed that both PD-1 and BTLA attenuate genes involved in immune response, proliferation, signalling, and cytokine production. Interestingly, BTLA consistently showed a stronger attenuation of genes that were upregulated upon TCR/CD3 complex stimulation compared to PD-1. There is also a large overlap between genes that are downregulated upon PD-1 and BTLA inhibition which resulted in the dampening of T-cell activity. Therefore, our study illustrates how PD-1 and BTLA attenuate genes that are upregulated upon TCR/CD3 complex stimulation while also providing a list of genes that are sensitive to PD-1 and BTLA inhibition.
