---
name: 'An approach to design benchmark datasets for pathogen detection in metagenomic data'
speakers:
	- Olateju Idowu
categories:
	- Talk (8min)
---
Metagenomic analysis has proven to be an invaluable method for determining the taxonomic breakdown of the microbes in an environment or a host. This, in combination with its intrinsic speed and low cost, has led to an interest in the use of metagenomics in the public health sector. However, due to the generality of the programs metagenomic analyses rely on, the produced results are often difficult to compare and can come to worrying and wrong conclusions. In this regard, we have identified the lack of benchmark datasets for rigorous testing of metagenomic analysis tools as a huge bottleneck for metagenomics in general use. We have designed a method that creates in-silico benchmark datasets, that mimics a real-life metagenomic sample, to measure how equipped metagenomic analysis programs are for pathogen detection. The method has been modelled by using, as a start, a real-life metagenomic sample, analysed with the metagenomic tool. Then a NGS simulator is used to simulate sequencing by generating fastq reads. The workflow is run with the Nextflow scientific workflow manager, and it has been conceived in order to have full transparency of the datasets and analysis results. We are releasing these benchmark datasets for detecting pathogens in metagenomes, and expect them to be used to better assess the proficiency of metagenomic analysis tools, and facilitate the adoption of metagenomics in routine clinical use for diagnosis and other public health sectors.
