---
name: 'Immune specific functional gene networks for applications in health and agricultural sectors.'
speakers:
	- Richard Hillis
categories:
	-
---
The dairy industry comprises a large proportion of Northern Ireland’s agricultural sector and contributes significantly to both the local and the global economy. Internationally there have been great increases in milk yield over time, enabled by directed breeding efforts assisted by the advent of genomic screening and high throughput sequencing technologies. However, despite these improvements, disease and other cattle health and welfare issues continue to cause economic losses to the industry. These include a variety of conditions including bovine viral diarrhoea, bovine tuberculosis, and mastitis, among others. This project focuses on using an integrative network biology analysis to explore the molecular determinants of bovine immune response and disease susceptibility. A survey of available datasets from the GEO repository was conducted to identify relevant Bos taurus immune cell specific data. Following this survey a single-cell sequencing dataset from cattle PBMC cells, which covers multiple immune cell types, has been selected to be used as input for training machine learning models, alongside gene pair GO semantic similarity measurements. Both Bayesian logistic regression and CosNI approaches are being used, and the models will generate functional gene networks for individual immune cell types. The networks predict context-specific biochemical interactions between genes in those immune cell types. Cattle phenotype data from genome wide association studies (GWAS) will also be analysed in combination with these networks. The results will inform construction of risk stratification models to predict bovine immune status, disease susceptibility phenotypes, and potential risk. These outcomes will help inform development of better treatment interventions for common cattle diseases and conditions, and eventually translate into better health for cattle within Northern Ireland and beyond with associated reductions in risk of zoonotic and antibiotic resistant disease.
