---
name: 'CCPlotR: An R package for the visualisation of cell-cell interactions'
speakers:
	- Sarah Ennis
categories:
	-
---
The increasing availability of scRNA-seq data in recent years has led to the development of multiple tools for predicting cellular crosstalk. These tools typically work by analysing the expression of genes that code for ligands and receptors from pairs of cell types that are known to interact with each other. Most tools will return a table of predicted interactions depicting the ligand, receptor, sending and receiving cell types for each interaction, as well as a score to rank important interactions (e.g. specificity or expression score). Some tools also generate plots to visualise the predicted interactions  but these are not consistent across tools and since most datasets include several cell populations, visualisation of interactomes or specific features of interactions can be challenging. While several reviews have been published which demonstrate various methods for visualising predicted cell-cell interactions, none of them include code or reference packages to generate these figures. This prompted us to develop CCPlotR - an R package that contains functions to generate cell-cell interaction plots. CCPlotR can generate several types of plots such as heatmaps, dotplots, circos plots and network diagrams, and works with the output of any cell-cell interaction prediction tool, requiring only a table of predicted interactions as input. It also allows the user to generate plots in the style of certain popular tools (e.g. CellPhoneDB, Liana), even if the results were generated by a different tool. The package is available on GitHub: https://github.com/Sarah145/CCPlotR and comes with a toy dataset to demonstrate the different functions. We anticipate that this will be a useful resource for single-cell researchers working with cell-cell interaction prediction tools.
