---
name: 'Investigating the effects of Beta and M-value offsets on statistical inferences from epigenome wide association studies'
speakers:
	- Solomon Beer
categories:
	-
---
DNA methylation is a type of epigenetic mark, where a methyl group is added to DNA, and can affect gene expression. DNA methylation can occur at locations along the genome known as CpG sites, and the methylation state of these sites in the DNA of a cell is influenced by the cell’s environment. Data are obtained from a DNA sample by using probes that measure the relative intensities of cells within a CpG site which are methylated and unmethylated. This process is repeated for several hundred thousand CpG sites across the (epi)genome.  It is assumed that the methylated and unmethylated intensities are both Gamma distributed. These intensities can then be used to calculate “Beta”, or “M” values, to allow for the investigation of associations between the average methylation state of a site and an exposure or outcome. Beta values are the ratio of a site’s methylated intensity to its total intensity and have a value between 0 and 1. M-values are the log2 ratio of a site’s methylated intensity to its unmethylated intensity. However, when intensities are low such data cannot be generated and this motivates the use of an offset in either the denominator of the ratio, or both denominator and numerator, when calculating Beta and M-values respectively. The offsets used are typically not changed from the default values in the software used to generate the data, i.e. 100 for Beta values, and 1 for M-values.  This study investigates whether the choice of offset impacts statistical inferences from epigenome wide association studies (EWAS). Using a publicly available dataset of raw intensities, we generated Beta and M-values using a range of offsets. We find that the offset used when calculating Beta or M-values has an effect on the inferences from an EWAS for sex. The choice of offset used when converting methylation intensities to Beta or M values can have an effect on the number and strength of significant associations found when running an EWAS. 
