---
name: 'Dosage effects of gene copy number'
speakers:
	- Sophie Matthews
categories:
	-
---
Copy number variants (CNVs) are a class of structural variants that are implicated in various human phenotypes. The duplication and deletion of genomic segments can result in copy number changes of whole genes within that region, and for dosage-sensitive genes, the gain or loss of gene copies can have a subsequent phenotypic effect. We explored the dosage effects of gene copy number to investigate the relationship between gene copy number and gene expression for CNVs that result in gain or loss of whole genes in data from the Genotype Tissue Expression (GTEx) consortium. Dosage-sensitivity is one hypothesis to explain the contribution of CNVs to disease. However, changes in gene copy number may also confer robustness against disease in special cases. For example, we hypothesized that duplications of tumour suppressor genes could be associated with a reduced risk of cancer. The “two-hit model” of cancer causation proposes that for a tumour suppressor gene to contribute to cancer both copies of the gene must be inactivated. An individual with an additional functional copy of a tumour suppressor gene would require an additional somatic mutation to inactivate the tumour suppressor gene, thus reducing the risk of cancer in that individual. We have investigated this hypothesis using data from the UK Biobank to determine if there is a relationship between copy number of tumour suppressor genes and cancer occurrence within individuals. We found no significant relationship between copy number of tumour suppressor genes and cancer incidence; however, these results were constrained by a lack of statistical power. A future direction of this project is to explore this from an evolutionary perspective, determining if copy number expansion of tumour suppressor genes correlates with changes in cancer risk across the mammalian phylogenetic tree.
