---
name: 'Genotype artifacts arising from strand-specific capture in the UK Biobank'
speakers:
	- Tyler Medina
categories:
	-
---
DNA sequencing artifacts are alterations that arise in reported DNA sequences as a result of non-biological processes. These artifactual changes do not represent the actual DNA sequence of the sequenced organism and can lead to false conclusions, such as false-positive variants and incorrect genotypes, when not identified and accounted for. Oxidative DNA damage to the sample, specifically, leads to the formation of apurinic/apyrimidinic sites through 8-oxoguanine formation, which are incorrectly paired with adenine bases during replication, leading to C→A/G→T mutations in DNA.  The UK Biobank study includes a release of 200,000 whole-exome sequencing (WES) samples. Across these samples, we find that the incidence of C→A/G→T mismatch alignments is asymmetric with respect to reads aligning to the coding strand vs. template strand of the target regions, occurring at a median of 3.46 times as often in coding strand reads. This asymmetry may arise as a result of strand-specificity in the capture probes used to produce the UK Biobank WES samples, whereby probes only capture the coding strand and thus only coding strand 8-oxo-G oxidative damage. We also find that the extent of this asymmetry in individual samples is positively and significantly correlated with both the overall number of singleton single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) detected per sample, as well as with the number of C→A variant genotypes per sample.  Due to the asymmetric nature of these C→A/G→T variant reads, we propose that their extent may serve as an indication of non-biological oxidative DNA damage to samples with high C→A/G→T asymmetry. As their presence is correlated with greater incidence of singleton SNVs (which have no supporting evidence elsewhere in the study population) and higher rates of C→A/G→T genotyping, high C→A/G→T asymmetry may indicate low quality samples with less reliable genotyping results who should be considered for exclusion from population studies in the UK Biobank.
