---
name: 'Muti-omics data integration to increase the biological understanding of feed efficiency in Holstein dairy cows'
speakers:
	- Wentao Jiang
categories:
	-
---
Feed costs account for a large proportion of total expenditure in dairy production, and to improve sector profitability, genetic selection of high feed efficiency (FE) animals may be a useful approach, increasing milk production with similar feed inputs or maintaining milk production with less feed.  Residual feed intake (RFI) is the difference between an individual animal's actual feed intake and the expected energy intake based on its maintenance requirements and production level. Animals are considered more efficient if they consume less feed than expected and do not inhibit production traits compared to other animals in the same herd. With projected increases in the global population and raised awareness regarding greenhouse gas emissions from livestock production, driving improvements in FE has become even more urgent. This has stimulated a renewed interest in FE studies in dairy cattle focused on the potential of selective breeding and advances in genetics to improve FE complex trait. The work of this PhD project will firstly seek to establish differential expression profiles of FE using Transcriptomic approaches to identify key biomarkers/SNPs associated with FE complex. This information will be used as prior knowledge in downstream network analyses to establish pathways and gene regulatory modules critical to FE. Machine learning will be further applied to estimate FE traits using milk mid-infrared data and integrating multi-omics data to discover overlapping and coordinated patterns hidden in individual omics datasets. The combined results based on Transcriptomics and Metabolomics may help to identify significant biomarkers/SNPs of FE for breeding strategies, as well as reveal the biological background of genetic architecture in lactating dairy cows.
