---
name: 'Multi-functional fibres as bio-based food binders, selectively modified using green technologies and enzymes'
speakers:
	- Whitney Vale-Hagan
categories:
	-
---
Consumers’ drive and regulators pressure for more sustainable foods has transformed the food industry. This is embodied in profound consumer shifts to vegan foods and plant proteins. There is an abundance of grain proteins which can be blended in mixtures offering tailored composition and flavour. The technological and physicochemical properties are, however, challenging to be controlled. Normally, binding agents - food grade molecules with protein binding capability - are required to achieve the structure and the stability that is expected in a food formulation, e.g., a vegan meal. Traditional binding agents, like gelatine, lecithin, or gums are either not vegan friendly or can induce allergies or simply not optimised to synergistically work with plant proteins. Some legume or seed starches used are either expensive or unsustainable to mass produce. Currently, the golden standard is methyl cellulose (E461), that is derived from wood fibres and includes chemical modifications. Conveniently, the thermos-gelation properties of this polysaccharide provides firmness above 60°C simulating the texture of meat. However, it is perceived as artificial and non-sustainable, an unpopular choice for health and environmentally conscious consumers and thus, there is a drive by food suppliers to develop alternative sustainable and clean label solutions. One of the most sustainable alternative sources are biotechnologically produced fibres sourced from by-products of the agri-food sector. Fibres can have multiple functionalities, including binding agent, rheology modifier, bulking material, emulsifier, and fat mimic as ingredients in food products. Therefore, there is a clear need and considerable market opportunity to develop alternative sustainably sourced fibrous binder using green technologies with similar, to the competition, capacity but achieving a clean label and a low environmental footprint
